In 1978, Intel reported some strange
errors popping up in their 16-kilobit
dynamic random access memory, or DRAM.
Ones would spontaneously flip to zeros
with no apparent cause. The problem
turned out to be the ceramic packaging
the chip was encased in.
With the demand for semiconductor
packaging skyrocketing in the 1970s, a
new manufacturing plant was constructed
on the Green River in Colorado.
Unfortunately, this site happened to be
just downstream of an old uranium mill.
Radioactive atoms made their way into
the river and then into the ceramic
packaging for Intel's microchips.
Intel scientists investigating the
problem found that even trace amounts of
uranium and thorium in the ceramic were
sufficient to cause problems. In their
DRAM, memory was stored as the presence
or absence of electrons in a
semiconductor well.
The alpha particles emitted by uranium
and thorium were energetic and ionizing
enough to create electron-hole pairs in
the silicon. If an alpha particle struck
in just the right place, it could create
a large number of free charge carriers,
causing electrons to accumulate in the
well, flipping a one to a zero.
This is known as a single event upset, a
type of soft error. The error is soft
because the device hasn't been damaged.
The bit has changed, but you could erase
it and rewrite it with no problems.
Investigators exposed the chips to alpha
emitters with different levels of
activity, and just as you'd expect, they
found the number of bit flips directly
correlated with the number of alpha
particles the chip had been exposed to.
The reason this problem was identified
in the 1970s was because chip components
had been miniaturized to the point where
a single alpha particle could produce
enough charge to flip a bit.
Immediately, these findings attracted a
lot of attention. Before Before was
published, it was widely circulated in
the industry and as a result, chip
manufacturers were a lot more careful to
avoid radioactive materials when
producing their microchips and
packaging.